# Precise Diagnosis of Prostate Cancer: analysis of tumor microenvironment and habitat through MRI detection of vascular and nerve invasion

## Abstract

**Purpose** Based on key clinical indicators for confirming the diagnosis of prostate cancer, we aim to address the complex challenges in medical image analysis by creating an radiomic features model based on Habitat analysis using MRI images, in order to improve the accuracy of prostate tumor diagnostic and predict the final outcome of prostate cancer patients, thereby improving their quality of life.

**Methods** Between January 2022 and December 2023, we retrospectively included 400 patients diagnosed with prostate cancer after pathologic verification. Multivariate analyses were performed to identify independent risk factors for the development of clinical models. Radiomic features within the tumor and in the habitat were developed using features extracted from MRI data, and the performance of these features was assessed primarily by the DeLong test using the area under the curve (AUC) of the subject's working feature, calibration curves by the Hosmer-Lemeshow test, and decision curve analysis.

**Results** In-depth analysis and comprehensive assessment of the tumor microenvironment, combined with advanced radiomics models can more accurately diagnose prostate cancer and predict its vascular and nerve invasion.The model based on intra-tumor heterogeneity score significantly outperforms the traditional radiomics model that considers the entire tumor. Among the optimal algorithms, the AUC values in the training set are: (AUC=0.882, Cl: 0.843-0.921) and (AUC=0.761, Cl: 0.695-0.827), while in the test set, the AUC values are: (AUC=0.860, Cl: 0.792-0.928) and (AUC=0.732, Cl: 0.630-0.834). The combined model that integrates Habit and Gleason scores outperforms the individual models. In the training set, the AUC value of the combined model is (AUC=0.889, Cl: 0.8509-0.9276), and in the test set, it is (AUC=0.886, Cl: 0.8183-0.9533).

**Conclusions** The comprehensive analysis and evaluation of the tumor microenvironment, integrated with radiomics models, holds the potential to significantly enhance the diagnostic precision and predictive accuracy in forecasting vascular and nerve invasion in prostate cancer. This approach serves as a valuable tool in optimizing treatment modalities, thereby improving patient prognosis and minimizing unnecessary medical interventions. Consequently, this study offers crucial theoretical and practical underpinnings for the advancement of precision medicine in the management of prostate cancer.